FIPXXXX: Non-Interactive PoRep (#1018)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FIPS/fip-xxx-ni-porep.md

---
fip: "XXXX"
author: luca (@lucaniz), kuba (@Kubuxu), nicola (@nicola), nemo (@cryptonemo), volker (@vmx), irene (@irenegia), Alex North (@anorth)
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/854 and https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/1007
status: Draft
type: Technical
category: Core
created: 2024-06-04
---
# FIP-XXXX: Non-Interactive PoRep

## Simple Summary

> This proposal presents a new PoRep protocol (Non-Interactive PoRep) that removes `PreCommit` when onboarding Committed Capacity (CC) sectors. As a result, we have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal presents a new PoRep protocol (Non-Interactive PoRep) that removes `PreCommit` when onboarding Committed Capacity (CC) sectors. This document is designed to replace the existing, accepted [FIP-0090: Non-Interactive PoRep](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0090.md) in its entirety.

As a result, we have
```

The protocol allows Storage Providers (SPs) to locally generate PoRep challenges instead of using on-chain randomness.

On the one hand, this feature of the protocol allows for a drastically simpler onboarding pipeline. On the other hand, it requires a higher number of PoRep challenges (2268 per SDR layer instead of the current 180 per SDR layer) in order to preserve network security.

NI-PoRep is proposed as an *optional* feature; the previously available proof types will still be supported. NI-PoRep is restricted to CC sectors (i.e., sectors with no data).

## Motivation

NI-PoRep will be beneficial for Filecoin in multiple ways, outlined below.

### Cost reduction thanks to a simplified onboarding pipeline

PoRep is currently interactive (in order to complete sealing, an SP has to wait to receive a challenge seed from the chain) and requires ad-hoc collateral. These features represent a limitation when considering optimisation for the onboarding pipeline, such as Sealing-as-a-Service (SaaS) and the new SupraSeal sealing code. With NI-PoRep, no interaction is needed and this yields:

> - [Gas cost reduction] Current PoRep is composed of two steps: PreCommit and ProveCommit. With NI-PoRep there is no more `PreCommit` method and message, and only `ProveCommit` remains, i.e. only one step with one chain message is needed to onboard sectors to the network.  This translates into a possible gas cost reduction when considering aggregated sectors; according to [our estimation](../resources/fip-0090/PoRep_GasComparison.pdf), current PoRep is 2.1x more expensive than NI-PoRep when aggregating 6 sectors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Gas cost reduction] The current PoRep is composed of two steps: PreCommit and ProveCommit. With NI-PoRep there is no more `PreCommit` method and message, and only `ProveCommit` remains, i.e. only one step with one chain message is needed to onboard sectors to the network.  This translates into a possible gas cost reduction when considering aggregated sectors; according to [our estimation](../resources/fip-0090/PoRep_GasComparison.pdf), current PoRep is 2.1x more expensive than NI-PoRep when aggregating 6 sectors.
```

- Enabling HDD wholesale: for an SP it would be possible to receive brand new drives with `sectorKeys ` pre-generated using its `miner_id`.

### Allow Storage Providers to specify proving deadline

Sectors onboarded with NI-PoRep allow storage providers to specify which proving deadline they want their sectors to be allocated to. This provides storage providers with greater operational flexibility compared to spreading the Window PoST workload over 24 hours.

### PoRep secured cryptographically and not rationally

The cryptographic security of sectors proven with NI-PoRep is increased: NI-PoRep makes misbehaving cryptographically infeasible rather than irrational.

### PoRep security now independent from consensus

> Current PoRep is interactive and needs to get randomness from the chain. Moreover, in order to be secure, a 150-epochs-wait is needed between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`([WaitSeed](https://lotus.filecoin.io/storage-providers/get-started/tasks/#waitseed)). This is due to the fact that some consensus attacks need to be made infeasible (as putting those attacks in place would allow for faking storage).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current PoRep is interactive and needs to get randomness from the chain. Moreover, in order to be secure, a 150-epochs-wait is needed between `PreCommit` and `ProveCommit`([WaitSeed](https://lotus.filecoin.io/storage-providers/get-started/tasks/#waitseed)). This is due to the fact that some consensus attacks need to be made infeasible (as putting those attacks in place would allow for faking storage).
```

In NI-PoRep, since randomness is derived locally, there is no link anymore between PoRep and consensus attacks. This means that

- Consensus attacks are not a concern anymore for NI-PoRep security;
- PoRep can now work “agnostically” with any consensus protocol.

> ## Backward compatibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Backward Compatibility
```

there's some title casing confusion here, but it looks like h2 as title case, and h3 as sentence case would make it consistent

The NI-PoRep protocol can be summarized as follows (see [here](https://spec.filecoin.io/algorithms/sdr/notation/) for notation and [here](https://spec.filecoin.io/algorithms/sdr/) for basic algorithms):

**Graph labelling and commitments** (similar to the current PC1 and PC2 computation)

1. Using `ReplicaID`, SP computes the labels for all layers and the replica R;
2. SP computes the column commitments `CommC` , `CommRLast` and finally computes `CommR = Poseidon_2(CommC, CommRLast)`;

**SP locally generates `NIChallengesNumber` challenges and vanilla proofs;**

1. Each challenge is of the form `NIChallenge_i = H(ReplicaID, CommR, i)`;
2. SP computes responses for all the `NIChallengesNumber` challenges, which result in `NIChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs;

**SP publishes the new `NIProveCommitSector` proof**

1. SP takes the `NIChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs and computes the corresponding SNARK proofs for these challenges and aggregates them into a single proof.
2. SP publishes the aggregated SNARK proof and commitment `CommR`.

**Chain verifies proof**

1. Using `CommR` as a seed, the chain generates `NIChallengesNumber` challenges and these are fed into proof verification.

> Note that, same as with interactive PoRep, each sector has a `SealRandEpoch` that identifies the sealing epoch; chain verification needs to happen within a fixed number of epochs to be valid. For NI-PoRep we call this parameter `sealChallengeEarliest`and set it to be equal to the number of epochs in 180 days (more details in the [Security Considerations section](#security-considerations)).

Reviewer: `MAX_PRE_COMMIT_RANDOMNESS_LOOKBACK` is currently 1 day + finality, does this also need to be 180 days + finality? The current builtin-actors niporep draft has 356 days + finality because it's following the same pattern as precommit lookback.

Author: @lucaniz can you chime in on this?

Reviewer 2: + finality is not needed here

### Actor changes

- Add two new proof types to the list of proof types that can be used when submitting a new sector
    - `StackedDrg32GiBV1_1_Feat_NiPoRep`
    - `StackedDrg64GiBV1_1_Feat_NiPoRep`

> - Introduce a new method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` (method 36), which performs a non-interactive proof for CC sectors, without a preceding PreCommitSector message (ie, this method rejects sectors that were already pre-committed. Such sectors must be activated with one of the existing ProveCommit methods). The method can be used with seal proofs or aggregate proof (but only one option can be chosen per call); the return type is the same  as `ProveCommitAggregate`.

Reviewer 3: > The method can be used with seal proofs or aggregate proof (but only one option can be chosen per call)

The method only accepts an aggregate proof.

Reviewer: language will need to be chosen carefully because the description already includes aggregation to get to a single proof, so we need to be clear that it's aggregate-of->=1.

maybe:

```suggestion
- Introduce a new method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` (method 36), which performs a non-interactive proof for CC sectors, without a preceding PreCommitSector message (ie, this method rejects sectors that were already pre-committed. Such sectors must be activated with one of the existing ProveCommit methods). The method can be used with aggregate proofs, even if there is only a single sector to prove. The return type includes a bitfield indicating the success of activating each referenced sector.
```

Author: Updated in: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/1018/commits/6d06663bd0f292271be63205aa080ed519350aab

> - Introduce a new method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` (method 36), which performs a non-interactive proof for CC sectors, without a preceding PreCommitSector message (ie, this method rejects sectors that were already pre-committed. Such sectors must be activated with one of the existing ProveCommit methods). The method can be used with seal proofs or aggregate proof (but only one option can be chosen per call); the return type is the same  as `ProveCommitAggregate`.

Reviewer 3: > the return type is the same as `ProveCommitAggregate`

ProveCommitAggregate doesn't return anything. The return type should instead be the same as ProveCommitSectors3Return, which carries a success bitfield and can thus sensibly use the input parameter `RequireActivationSuccess=false` and indicate to the caller which sectors did succeed.

Rather than refer to another method, just include the return type here.

```
struct ProveCommitSectorsNIReturn {
    pub activation_results: BatchReturn,
}
```

Author: Added in: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/1018/commits/83b3065c3c7f03802e4478b43b999e173e6791af

  
  ```go
  // Note no UnsealedCID because it must be "zero" data.
  struct SectorNIActivationInfo {
      SealingNumber: SectorNumber, // Sector number used to generate replica id
      SealerID: ActorID, // Must be set to ID of receiving actor for now
      SealedCID: Cid, // CommR

>       SectorNumber: SectorNumber, // unique id of sector in actor state

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      SectorNumber: SectorNumber, // unique id of sector for the receiving actor
```

      SealRandEpoch: ChainEpoch,
      Expiration: ChainEpoch,
  }

  struct ProveCommitSectorsNIParams {
     // Information about sealing of each sector.
     Sectors: []SectorNIActivationInfo
     // Aggregate proof for all sectors.
     AggregateProof: []byte,

>      // Proof type for aggregation

Reviewer 3: A seal proof type parameter is still required as well.

```
  // Proof type for each seal (must be an NI-PoRep variant)
   SealProofType: RegisteredSealProof,
```

Reviewer: _(my bad, I suggested it could be removed, but you're right!)_

Author: Added in: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/1018/commits/c0970a952606ac2a7ba7aefaad5d9c8329fb1a03

Reviewer 2: Given that we are using aggregation only (for any number of sectors in the range [1, 65]), shouldn't it be 

```
// Proof type for aggregation, if aggregated
   AggregateProofType: Option<RegisteredAggregateProof>
```

instead of `SealProofType"?

Reviewer 4: @anorth why both seal and aggregate proof are needed still?

Reviewer 2: I believe that only aggregate proof type is required now.

cc @cryptonemo

Reviewer 3: The seal proof type, as well as the aggregate proof type, is required by the FVM syscall and thence the proofs API for verifying the aggregate. In existing methods like ProveCommitSectors3, the seal proof type is taken from the pre-commit object.

If the proofs API is somehow wrong in requiring this parameter, then let's fix it, but there is a practical requirement for both proof type parameters right now.

- 32GiB sector: 449900*N/10 + Constant32(N)
- 64GiB sector: 359280*N/10 + Constant64(N),
  
where Constant32(N) and Constant64(N) are as follows:

| Number of circuits aggregated, N      | Number of interactive PoRep proofs aggregated | Number of NI-PoRep proofs aggregated, k | Constant32(N) | Constant64(N) |
| ----------- | ----------- | ----------- |  ----------- |  ----------- |
| ≤ 64 = 2^6  | ≤ 6         | - | 103’994’170 | 102’581’240 |
| ≤ 128 = 2^7 | ≤12 | 1 | 112’356’810| 110’803’030|
| ≤ 256 = 2^8  | ≤ 25 | 2 | 122’912’610 | 120’803’700|
| ≤ 512 = 2^9 | ≤ 51 | ≤ 4 | 137’559’930 | 134’642’130 |
| ≤1024 = 2^10 | ≤ 102 | ≤ 8 | 162’039’100 | 157’357’890 |
| ≤ 2048 = 2^11 | ≤ 204 | ≤ 16 | 210’960’780 | 203’017’690 |
| ≤ 4096 = 2^12 | ≤ 409 | ≤ 32 | 318’351’180 | 304’253’590 |
| ≤ 8192 = 2^13 | ≤ 819 | ≤ 65 | 528’274’980 | 509’880’640 |

Since one NI-PoRep proof (128 bits of security) corresponds to aggregating 126 circuits, the gas units for the verification of one NI-PoRep proof is given by:

32GiB sector: 44990*126 + 112356810 = 118025550

64GiB sector: 35928*126 + 110803030 = 115329958 

**Aggregation**:

> The minimum number of sector NI-PoRep proofs that may be aggregated is 1, and the maximum is 65. Using the same formula as above, the gas charged for verification of k NI-PoRep proofs (128 bits) is equal to 

Reviewer: I don't believe we've seen proof size numbers for this yet; I've asked but it seems like there's not a clear answer yet. How big would a message have to be to include 65 aggregated proofs?

Reviewer 2: Exact size of an aggregate proof depends on the number of circuits that are aggregates, but I think the max should not be over 25 kB. So 25 kB x 65 ~1.6 MB. Too big or just in the limit?

@vmx should have the exact numbers here

Reviewer 5: I think this is an upper bound which would be the batching footpring (23Kb is the size of 126 batched sircuits aka 1 NI PoRep proof). 126 circuits aggregated is actually the breakeven after which aggregation starts "gaining" over batching as it grows logaritmically. Let me have a look at the snarkpack paper and I'll get back to you

Reviewer 5: <img width="454" alt="Screenshot 2024-06-05 at 14 35 39" src="https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/assets/30462562/24f131ae-4c3f-44ed-84ca-17510d3bdb47">
So, green line is the aggregated proof. Plot gets up to 500 while we are looking to ~ 2^13 (8320 iirc). 
Anyway, the upper bound seems to be around 40kb. @vmx any better estimation?
if you want to know more, you can read about snarkpack here https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/529.pdf
specifically section 7

Reviewer 6: The 32GiB test completed and I'm seeing `40948` bytes.

Reviewer 7: The number of circuits is 126 https://github.com/filecoin-project/rust-fil-proofs/blob/0dfef1d8416c8240400fc188e90f0e55fa6b90ae/filecoin-proofs/src/constants.rs#L152

Author: Added the numbers here: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/1018/commits/94faafd2d02ee17119bb620ed5465397bbde29b3

32GiB sector: 44990 * 126 * k + Constant32(126 * k) 

64GiB sector: 35928 * 126 * k + Constant64(126 * k) 

> Usually `GasUsed * BaseFee` is burned for every message. However, for aggregated batches of proofs (for example ProveCommitSectorsAggregate and ProveReplicaUpdates3 messages) we charge an additional proportional fee introduced in FIP0013 and updated in FIP0024. With NI-PoRep, when aggregating at most 5 sectors (ie, k ≤ 5), the per sector gas cost is already larger than the current value (~34721049), and therefore in this case there is no need for any additional fee. On the other hand, when aggregating 6 or more sectors, the additional gas fee is needed again. In this case the fee is computed using the current function used for interactive proofs (`PayBatchGasCharge` function, as stated in [FIP0024](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0024.md#specification)) but passing as input the number of proofs - 5.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Usually `GasUsed * BaseFee` is burned for every message. However, for aggregated batches of proofs (for example ProveCommitSectorsAggregate and ProveReplicaUpdates3 messages) we charge an additional proportional fee introduced in FIP0013 and updated in FIP0024. With NI-PoRep, when aggregating at most 5 sectors (ie, k ≤ 5), the per sector gas cost is already larger than the current value (~34721049), and therefore in this case there is no need for any additional fee. On the other hand, when aggregating 6 or more sectors, the additional fee is needed again. In this case the fee is computed using the current function used for interactive proofs (`PayBatchGasCharge` function, as stated in [FIP0024](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0024.md#specification)) but passing as input the number of proofs - 5.
```

> Usually `GasUsed * BaseFee` is burned for every message. However, for aggregated batches of proofs (for example ProveCommitSectorsAggregate and ProveReplicaUpdates3 messages) we charge an additional proportional fee introduced in FIP0013 and updated in FIP0024. With NI-PoRep, when aggregating at most 5 sectors (ie, k ≤ 5), the per sector gas cost is already larger than the current value (~34721049), and therefore in this case there is no need for any additional fee. On the other hand, when aggregating 6 or more sectors, the additional gas fee is needed again. In this case the fee is computed using the current function used for interactive proofs (`PayBatchGasCharge` function, as stated in [FIP0024](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0024.md#specification)) but passing as input the number of proofs - 5.

Author: Addressed in: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/1018/commits/70e18eb50a2e04a627bf931e76f115602c97cb93

## Design Rationale

> Current PoRep is interactive, and it is composed of two steps: PreCommit and ProveCommit. At PreCommit, SP puts down a collateral (PCD) and waits 150 epochs in order to receive a challenge seed from the chain, which enables the ProveCommit step. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current PoRep is interactive, and it is composed of two steps: PreCommit and ProveCommit. At PreCommit, the SP puts down a collateral (PCD) and waits 150 epochs in order to receive a challenge seed from the chain, which enables the ProveCommit step. 
```

### How to take `SealRandomness` for ensuring sectors are anchored to the chain

The epoch in which sealing took place is identified by the corresponding chain reference, called `SealRandomness` which is the anchor of the sector to the chain. `SealRandomness` must be taken from the VRF chain, in order to ensure that no other fork can replay the Seal.

On one hand, `SealRandomness` needs to be taken from finalized blocks, but on the other hand it can not be taken farther back than necessary (in order to protect against long-range attacks). This means that `SealRandomness` needs to be verified.

Given NI-PoRep removes onchain interaction, `SealRandomness` verification becomes more difficult, but still necessary to protect the chain against the same class of attacks mentioned above.

> We set up a validity time window which holds for all the sectors committed onchain together. We call this time window to be  `sealChallengeEarliest` epochs and set its value to be the number of epochs in 180 days.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We set up a validity time window which holds for all the sectors committed onchain together. We set this window, called `sealChallengeEarliest`, to be the number of epochs in 180 days.
```

This means that, if PC1, PC2, C1, C2 happen locally over time resulting into different sectors sealed in different moments in time and committed on-chain at the end of the process, all sectors committed together should have a randomness which is not older than  `sealChallengeEarliest` epochs in the past. As a result, a NI-PoRep step needs to be completed within `sealChallengeEarliest` epochs overall to be valid.

> ### Impact of Caller-Specified Proving Deadlines on Network Load

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Impact of caller-specified proving deadlines on network load
```

Automatic proving scheduling was motivated by a caution about overloading the network at particular times of day with too many Window PoSTs due at the same time. However, since the introduction of the FVM and a robust gas model, the network itself is not at much risk from this anymore. We might reasonably expect SPs to make reasonable scheduling decisions to optimize their own cost and risk profile, given knowledge and expectations about the scheduling of other SPs

A Window PoST for every sector must still be submitted every 24 hours.

The Window PoST dispute window is 1800 epochs (15 hours). The worst case impact on the minimum cost to dispute a Window PoST is thus when all partitions are scheduled uniformly across a 15-hour period: then a dispute for the first deadline must compete with PoST submissions in the last (or some prior deadline). This would affect gas availability only if the network were above 67% of capacity for Window PoST throughput. Window PoST today is <10% of gas utilisation.

> ## Addressing concerns **due to interaction removal**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Addressing concerns regarding the removal of interactivity
```

> Concerns were raised over the possibility that a malicious party wanting to take over the network could potentially keep accumulating sectors locally before onboarding them to the network all at once. [Our analysis](../resources/fip-0090/interactionRemoval.pdf) shows that no additional security risks are introduced with respect to Interactive PoRep. The security of both pathways can be improved by decoupling the power table lookback from consensus, which may be a subject for a future FIP.

Author: I'm not a native English speaker, and my grades in written English were not the best. But isn't `lookback` more correct here? Given that in this context we refer to a power table lookback period, rather than "look back at past events."

## Incentive Considerations

NI-PoRep will implement the batch balancer currently in place. See [FIP-0013](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0013.md) and the Section "Gas calculations" above for details.

> 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

## Product Considerations

NI-PoRep represents another step forward after the introduction of Synthetic PoRep (see [FIP-0059](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0059.md)). 

> As already mentioned above, NI-PoRep is a prerequisite to unblock new use cases like trustless SaaS and HDD wholesale as well as allowing for SupraSeal software employment at full potential. Moreovere, note that enabling trustless SaaS can lower the entry bar for new Storage Providers to join the network.

Reviewer: I quite like the sound of "Morèovère" in my head with a french accent.

### Comparison against Interactive PoRep

In order to have a good cost estimation, we ran benchmarks on different systems. We observe that the SNARK phase of NI-PoRep is consistently 12.5x-13x slower than Interactive PoRep, in line with expectations.

### Impact of SupraSeal

The SNARK phase consists of two distinct steps:
- The synthesis, which is a memory- and CPU-heavy operation
- The proving, which is GPU-heavy

The SupraSeal implementation only targets the proving, where we observe speedups between 6-10x. When the synthesis is also taken into account, then the overall improvements are 3-5x. This means that NI-PoRep with SupraSeal is only 2.5-4.5x slower than Interactive PoRep without SupraSeal.

The ratio between synthesis and proving time depends on the GPU, and consequently so does the speedup. In particular, synthesis time tends to be dominant in newer GPUs, reducing the overall speedup.

For benchmark data, see: [SupraSeal C2 benchmarks](../resources/fip-0090/benchmarks.pdf).

## Implementations

> Implementation in progress (TODO).

Reviewer 3: Please link to the PR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* <https://github.com/filecoin-project/builtin-actors/pull/1537>
```

---
fip: "XXXX"

> author: luca (@lucaniz), kuba (@Kubuxu), nicola (@nicola), nemo (@cryptonemo), volker (@vmx), irene (@irenegia), Alex North (@anorth)

Reviewer 4: @rjan90 I think you are an author too 😄

Author: Added in: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/1018/commits/aa1c2c05e71713695560e5cd92979eb30a853738

discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/854 and https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/1007
status: Draft
type: Technical
category: Core
created: 2024-06-04
---
# FIP-XXXX: Non-Interactive PoRep

## Simple Summary

> This proposal presents a new PoRep protocol (Non-Interactive PoRep) that removes `PreCommit` when onboarding Committed Capacity (CC) sectors. This document is designed to replace the existing, accepted [FIP-0090: Non-Interactive PoRep](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0090.md) in its entirety.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This proposal builds on and supersedes  [FIP-0090: Non-Interactive PoRep](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0090.md).
```

> This proposal presents a new PoRep protocol (Non-Interactive PoRep) that removes `PreCommit` when onboarding Committed Capacity (CC) sectors. This document is designed to replace the existing, accepted [FIP-0090: Non-Interactive PoRep](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0090.md) in its entirety.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This proposal presents a new PoRep protocol (Non-Interactive PoRep) that removes `PreCommit` when onboarding Committed Capacity (CC) sectors. This proposal builds on and supersedes  [FIP-0090: Non-Interactive PoRep](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0090.md).
```

As a result, we have

- Simplified storage onboarding pipeline;
- Trustless separation between storage and computing: the proving tasks associated with sector onboarding can be outsourced;

> - Unblocking [SupraSeal](https://github.com/supranational/supra_seal)'s full potential.

Reviewer 4: I think we should mention "This proposal builds on and supersedes [FIP-0090](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0090.md)."

### Trustless Sealing-as-a-Service (SaaS) becomes possible

NI-PoRep enables the full separation between computation and storage tasks. In particular, no `PCD` ([PreCommit Deposit](https://spec.filecoin.io/#section-systems.filecoin_mining.storage_mining.balance-requirements)) is needed, which brings the following benefits:
- Currently a SaaS Provider (the entity running the PoRep steps) needs to put down the PCD for the sector, along with the PreCommit message. The PCD will be re-paid or prepaid by the SP sending the final SNARK proof on the chain (i.e., the SP that will store the sector for the following PoST). With NI-PoRep, this level of payment interaction is not needed. In particular, this kind of simplification helps SPs and SaaS providers to delegate computation tasks (ie, PoRep can be split into specialized subtasks that get outsourced to specialized entities).
- Enabling HDD wholesale: it would be possible for an SP to receive brand new drives with `sectorKeys ` pre-generated using its `miner_id`.

### Allow Storage Providers to specify proving deadline

> Sectors onboarded with NI-PoRep allow storage providers to specify which proving deadline they want their sectors to be allocated to. This provides storage providers with greater operational flexibility compared to spreading the Window PoST workload over 24 hours.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Storage providers can specify the proving deadline they want their NI-PoRep sectors to be allocated to upon onboarding. This provides storage providers with greater operational flexibility compared to having the Window PoST workload randomly spread over 24 hours.
```

Author: Added in: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/1018/commits/fdf2fe3ca3274c804d4922be90c3d5c9d48303ab. I removed the word "randomly", since its your initial proving deadline that you start filling up that is choosen at random.

2. SP computes responses for all the `NIChallengesNumber` challenges, which result in `NIChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs;

**SP publishes the new `NIProveCommitSector` proof**

1. SP takes the `NIChallengesNumber` vanilla proofs and computes the corresponding SNARK proofs for these challenges and aggregates them into a single proof.
2. SP publishes the aggregated SNARK proof and commitment `CommR`.

**Chain verifies proof**

1. Using `CommR` as a seed, the chain generates `NIChallengesNumber` challenges and these are fed into proof verification.

Note that, same as with interactive PoRep, each sector has a `SealRandEpoch` that identifies the sealing epoch; chain verification needs to happen within a fixed number of epochs to be valid. For NI-PoRep we call this parameter `sealChallengeEarliest`and set it to be equal to the number of epochs in 180 days (more details in the [Security Considerations section](#security-considerations)).

### Actor changes

- Add two new proof types to the list of proof types that can be used when submitting a new sector
    - `StackedDrg32GiBV1_1_Feat_NiPoRep`
    - `StackedDrg64GiBV1_1_Feat_NiPoRep`

> - Introduce a new method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` (method 36), which performs a non-interactive proof for CC sectors, without a preceding PreCommitSector message (ie, this method rejects sectors that were already pre-committed. Such sectors must be activated with one of the existing ProveCommit methods). The method can be used with seal proofs or aggregate proof (but only one option can be chosen per call); the return type is the same as `ProveCommitAggregate`.

Reviewer 4: I feel like `ProveCommitNISectors` reads a bit better for me.. opinion weakly hold tho

> - Introduce a new method `ProveCommitSectorsNI` (method 36), which performs a non-interactive proof for CC sectors, without a preceding PreCommitSector message (ie, this method rejects sectors that were already pre-committed. Such sectors must be activated with one of the existing ProveCommit methods). The method can be used with seal proofs or aggregate proof (but only one option can be chosen per call); the return type is the same as `ProveCommitAggregate`.

Reviewer 4: > The method can be used with seal proofs or aggregate proof (but only one option can be chosen per call

non-editorial q: will seal proofs still be accepted now that we are taking away proof batching option for NI PoRep sectors?

Reviewer 2: we need to check how @cryptonemo modified the API for proof code, but my understanding is that now the method can be used only with aggregate proof with the novelty that the minimum number of sectors that can be aggregated is 1

Reviewer 6: There are 2 ways to create NI-PoRep proofs via the API: 1) You call `seal_commit_phase2` as normal (with the appropriate NI-PoRep proof type and  sector_id) and get an aggregate NI-PoRep proof in return, or 2) You call `seal_commit_phase2_circuit_proofs` with any number of sectors and then finally call `aggregate_seal_commit_proofs` with all of the circuit proofs across sectors and get an aggregate NI-PoRep proof in return.

Method 2 should be preferred by integrations, but they are functionally the same.

As a side note, method 1 jut does method 2 internally (see https://github.com/filecoin-project/rust-fil-proofs/blob/master/filecoin-proofs/src/api/seal.rs#L607 for reference).  The bounds (min/max) check during aggregation is here: https://github.com/filecoin-project/rust-fil-proofs/blob/master/filecoin-proofs/src/api/seal.rs#L759 (although the constants will be updated to FIP92 instead of FIP90 once FIP92 passes; see draft PR here: https://github.com/filecoin-project/rust-fil-proofs/pull/1758).

  
  ```go
  // Note no UnsealedCID because it must be "zero" data.
  struct SectorNIActivationInfo {
      SealingNumber: SectorNumber, // Sector number used to generate replica id
      SealerID: ActorID, // Must be set to ID of receiving actor for now
      SealedCID: Cid, // CommR
      SectorNumber: SectorNumber, // unique id of sector for the receiving actor
      SealRandEpoch: ChainEpoch,
      Expiration: ChainEpoch,
  }

  struct ProveCommitSectorsNIParams {
     // Information about sealing of each sector.
     Sectors: []SectorNIActivationInfo
     // Proof type for each seal (must be an NI-PoRep variant)
     SealProofType: RegisteredSealProof,
     // Aggregate proof for all sectors.
     AggregateProof: []byte,
     // Proof type for aggregation
     AggregateProofType: RegisteredAggregateProof
     // Whether to abort if any sector activation fails.
     RequireActivationSuccess: bool,
     // The Window PoST deadline index at which to schedule the new sectors.
     ProvingDeadline uint64 
   }

  ```
  
- Constraints:

>     - The `ProvingDeadline` must be between 0 and 47, inclusive. It corresponds to the Window PoST deadline index at which all the new sectors must be regularly proven. The `ProvingDeadline` must not be the current or next deadline to be proven by the receiving actor.

Reviewer 4: can you mention how the message will fail (error/exit code) if an illegal deadline is submitted?

Author: Fixed in: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/1018/commits/c86fd535188f97248032cf8b1759fa031cb716d6

  
- Related constants
    - `sealChallengeEarliest` set to be equal to the number of epochs in 180 days.
      
### Proof changes

> - Add two new proof types to the list of proof types that can be used when pre-committing a new sector

Reviewer 4: pre-committing or prove-committing?

Reviewer 2: well, technically ni-porep does pre-commit "inside" the new prove commit method. So both are  correct (pre commit happens locally prove commits goes on chain).
I guess if we want to refer to the method and what goes on chain, "prove-committing" is a better choice!

Author: Updated in: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/pull/1018/commits/85c4de61cd65d8f8c0bca78fe9082b53600b962a

- 32GiB sector: 449900*N/10 + Constant32(N)
- 64GiB sector: 359280*N/10 + Constant64(N),
  
where Constant32(N) and Constant64(N) are as follows:

| Number of circuits aggregated, N      | Number of interactive PoRep proofs aggregated | Number of NI-PoRep proofs aggregated, k | Constant32(N) | Constant64(N) |
| ----------- | ----------- | ----------- |  ----------- |  ----------- |
| ≤ 64 = 2^6  | ≤ 6         | - | 103’994’170 | 102’581’240 |
| ≤ 128 = 2^7 | ≤12 | 1 | 112’356’810| 110’803’030|
| ≤ 256 = 2^8  | ≤ 25 | 2 | 122’912’610 | 120’803’700|
| ≤ 512 = 2^9 | ≤ 51 | ≤ 4 | 137’559’930 | 134’642’130 |
| ≤1024 = 2^10 | ≤ 102 | ≤ 8 | 162’039’100 | 157’357’890 |
| ≤ 2048 = 2^11 | ≤ 204 | ≤ 16 | 210’960’780 | 203’017’690 |
| ≤ 4096 = 2^12 | ≤ 409 | ≤ 32 | 318’351’180 | 304’253’590 |
| ≤ 8192 = 2^13 | ≤ 819 | ≤ 65 | 528’274’980 | 509’880’640 |

Since one NI-PoRep proof (128 bits of security) corresponds to aggregating 126 circuits, the gas units for the verification of one NI-PoRep proof is given by:

32GiB sector: 44990*126 + 112356810 = 118025550

64GiB sector: 35928*126 + 110803030 = 115329958 

**Aggregation**:

> The minimum number of sector NI-PoRep proofs that may be aggregated is 1, and the maximum is 65. Using the same formula as above, the gas charged for verification of k NI-PoRep proofs (128 bits) is equal to 

Reviewer 4: I recall seeing something the minimal amount for aggregation is 2 instead of 1, can you please confirm that? if thats not de case please resolve this comment!

Reviewer: minimum is being _reduced_ from 2 to 1 in this revision so that we don't have to have the batch option for a single proof

32GiB sector: 44990 * 126 * k + Constant32(126 * k) 

64GiB sector: 35928 * 126 * k + Constant64(126 * k) 

> Usually `GasUsed * BaseFee` is burned for every message. However, for aggregated batches of proofs (for example, ProveCommitSectorsAggregate and ProveReplicaUpdates3 messages), we charge an additional proportional fee introduced in FIP0013 and updated in FIP0024. With NI-PoRep, when aggregating at most 5 sectors (i.e. k ≤ 5), the per sector gas cost is already larger than the current value (~34721049), and therefore, in this case, there is no need for any additional fee. On the other hand, when aggregating 6 or more sectors, the additional fee is needed again. In this case, the fee is computed using the current function used for interactive proofs (`PayBatchGasCharge` function, as stated in [FIP0024](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0024.md#specification)) but passing as input the number of proofs - 5.

Reviewer 4: > the current value (~34721049)

what is current value referring to here?

Reviewer 2: It is what is used today in `ChargeGas` (actor code), for proof verification. It was decided some time ago using empirical measurements of proof verification on representative hardware.
